<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Presidential Speeches</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/home.css"/>
    </head>
    <body>
        <!--#include virtual="inc/navbar.html" -->
        <div id="content">
            <h1 id="title">Presidential Speeches</h1>
            <h2 id="subTitle">From 1789 to 2013</h2>
            <div id="homepage">
                <h3>About</h3>
                <p> This project is for the Autumn 2015 session of the Computational Methods in
                    Humanities course. </p>
                <h3>Project Objective</h3>
                <p> The purpose of this project is to compare speeches by U.S. Presidents. The
                    comparisons are made by time, by president, and by type of speech given. The
                    main point of comparison is the topics in the speeches. </p>
                <p> Here are some of the questions that might be answered based on the comparisons: </p>
                <ul>
                    <li>Did the topics in speeches change over time?</li>
                    <li>Did different presidents focus on different topics?</li>
                    <li>What topics were predominant in Inaugural speeches vs. State of the Union
                        Speeches?</li>
                </ul>
                <h3>Project Scope</h3>
                <p>A corpus consisting of all U.S. presidential speeches would be extremely large
                    and outside the scope of this project. Some selection critiria were made to
                    narrow down the corpus. The first criterion was to only use Inaugural and State
                    of the Union (SotU) speeches. The second was to limit the number of presidents.
                    Selection criteria for the presidents are as follows:</p>
                <ul>
                    <li>Has at least 2 Inaugural speeches (and by extension has at least two
                        SotU)</li>
                    <li>Has some unique circumstances that make them stand out</li>
                    <li>No more than 2 presidents from any 50 year period</li>
                    <li>Some from when the SotU were delivered as speech and some from when the SotU were delivered as
                        written messages</li>
                </ul>
                <p>Final Selection:</p>
                <ul>
                    <li>George Washington</li>
                    <li>James Madison</li>
                    <li>Abraham Lincoln</li>
                    <li>Grover Cleveland</li>
                    <li>Woodrow Wilson</li>
                    <li>Franklin Roosevelt</li>
                    <li>Richard Nixon</li>
                    <li>Barack Obama</li>
                </ul>
                <p>Washington and Obama were selected for the obvious reason that they are the first
                    and last presidents. They span the entire time frame for this project. Cleveland
                    was the only president to serve non consecutive terms. FDR was the only
                    president to serve more than two terms. Lincoln was president during a time of
                    upheaval in U.S. history. Wilson was the president that reinstituted spoken SotU
                    address.</p>
                <h3>Extending the Project</h3>
                <p> Given time, the scope of this project may be extended in various ways. One way
                    is to expand the corpus to include all presidents and other types of speeches.
                    Another way is to tag for different items of interest. Some examples might
                    be:</p>
                <ul>
                    <li>All mention of places outside of the U.S. These places can be further coded
                        with their region and time of mention. These can be used to visualize how
                        the U.S.'s focus on foreign policy have shifted over time.</li>
                    <li>All mention of proper names. Do presidential speeches refer to historical
                        figures, or contemporaries? Are they famous people or ordinary folks? Are
                        they other politicians, philosophers, scientists, or some other types? Are
                        they other presidents? It would be fun to see which presidents gets
                        mentioned most by other presidents. This can probably be calculated as
                        aggregate number of mentions or number of mentions per years since they have
                        been president.</li>
                    <li>Who or what gets quoted in the speeches? Do the presidents like to quote
                        other people or books or something else in their speeches?</li>
                </ul>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="bottom">
            <footer> </footer>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
